You know, if you're just joining us, we have been working our way this fall through a series called Long Journey Home, looking at the journey of Israel from their time of captivity, bondage in Egypt until they made it to the Promised Land.
Now, we're getting real close to the end of the series.
In fact, next Sunday, we're going to finally make it to the Promised Land.
But before we get there, I'm just wondering if you have ever met one of those people who just seems to have it all.
You know, they've got, they're smart, they're talented, they're attractive, they're athletic, they've got a charismatic personality.
Have you ever met someone like that?
I mean, other than me.
I once read a book by a guy named Brent Hansen called Unoffendable.
And in it, he tells a story of one of those people who just seems to have it all.
And he calls the guy the ultimate dude.
And let me just read for you his description of the ultimate dude.
He says, I once met the ultimate dude.
I was in Afghanistan working with the hospital network, Cure International, and they assigned him as security to make sure I didn't get killed.
Let me describe his awesomeness.
He can speak Dari the local language because he's smart.
He's also six foot four and in perfect condition.
He can handle weapons because he's a special forces veteran.
He's got combat experience.
He also looks like John Hamm and appears no lie 20 years younger than he is.
Did I mention he was smart?
He's owned restaurants, apartment buildings, and several very successful medical businesses in the United States.
And he's an inventor, developing tactical wear for dozens of militaries and police forces worldwide.
So yeah, he's impressive.
Well, I forgot to mention he's theologically astute.
His dad was chairman of the board at one of the top seminaries in the United States.
And oh yeah, he played big time college football.
He started on a defensive line for a big 12 team.
He does walk with a slight limp, but even that seeming vulnerability becomes impressive when you hear the story of how you heard it jumping out of a helicopter on a mission.
So I'm already feeling inferior.
But when he walked in to Cures Hospital, the top plastic surgeon at the hospital,
Afghanistan's top docked at healing children from disabilities, Kim running over to us, shouted the ultimate dude's name, and embraced him.
Why?
Because the ultimate dude taught him how to do plastic surgeries at the hospital.
He's a surgeon too.
One of the best.
I neglected to mention that.
By the way, when I met the ultimate dude, he was getting ready for his wedding.
He was marrying a runner up in the Miss Universe contest.
Some of the celebrity friends would be there, like best-selling international thriller authors who use him to help shape stories.
I'm not making this guy up.
He really exists.
And I really like him.
He's such a great guy and a huge blessing to people in many countries.
Cures healed so many children, done so much for the least of these.
And the ultimate dude has been part of that.
It's all amazing.
If I were that guy, I would have a hard time not just walking around thinking, I'm so awesome, I can barely stand it.
So he's a Christian and also a great looking, tall, athletic, wealth-making, beauty queen marrying, special forces serving, celebrity befriending, weapons bearing, multiple language speaking, business starting, cutting edge equipment inventing, world hopping, child saving, plastic surgeon.
And there's one more thing.
He's insecure.
He told us as much.
He really struggles with it.
He feels as though he's trying to live up to something and he doesn't know what and he feels he's falling short.
I'm so thankful for his honesty, that my first thought was actually great.
Now he's authentic and likable too.
Well today we're going to consider another ultimate dude, a guy named Caleb.
The first time Caleb is mentioned is in the book of Numbers, chapter 13.
And this is where we read the story about Moses sending spies into the promised land to scope it out.
And God has already told them the land is going to be theirs, that he's going to go before them, he's going to go with them, he's going to give them the victory.
And the despised job is simply to do some advanced reconnaissance, getting ready for this mission.
So here's how the story begins.
The Lord spoke to Moses saying, send men to spy out the land of Canaan, which I'm giving to the people of Israel.
From each tribe of their fathers, you shall send a man, everyone achieved among them.
So Moses sent them.
From the tribe of Judah, Caleb, the son of Defuna.
Now the first thing we learn about Caleb is that he is a chief within the tribe of Judah.
So in terms of qualifying as an ultimate dude, Caleb's first star on his resume is that he's a recognized leader.
He's a recognized chief.
Now I don't know what image that evokes in your mind when you think about a chief.
But if you're thinking big feathered headdress, that's not what it's about.
We learn a bit more about what this chief title means from a story in Exodus chapter 18.
And it is the story of a father-in-law who is meddling in his son-in-law's business.
The father-in-law's name is Jethro.
And his son-in-law is a guy named Moses.
And here's what we find in Exodus chapter 18.
The next day Moses sat to judge the people and the people stood around Moses from morning till evening.
When Moses' father-in-law saw all that he was doing for the people, he said, what is this that you're doing for the people?
Why do you sit all alone and all the people stand around you from morning till evening?
And Moses said to his father-in-law, because the people come to me to inquire of God.
When they have a dispute, they come to me and I decide between one person and another and I make them know the statutes of God and His laws.
Moses' father-in-law said to him, what you're doing is not good.
You and the people with you will certainly wear yourselves out for the thing is too heavy for you.
You're not able to do it alone.
Now obey my voice.
I will give you advice and God be with you.
You shall represent the people before God and bring their cases to God, and you shall warn them about the statutes and the laws and make them know the way in which they must walk and what they must do.
Moreover, look for able men from all the people, men who fear God, who are trustworthy and hate-a-bribe, and place such men over the people as chiefs of thousands, of hundreds, of fifties, and of tins.
and let them judge the people at all times.
Every great matter they shall bring to you, but any small matter they shall decide themselves.
So it will be easier for you and they will bear the burden with you."
Not a bad plan.
Did you spot that word, chiefs?
Based on this passage, I take it that Caleb was one of those chiefs.
Maybe we would call him a judge.
uh... justice of the peace uh... civil court judge in particular and from jethro's outline would appear that there was uh... an appeals court process uh... there were some judges uh... judges of tens who handled very minor matters you know my neighbors goat eight my laundry but but then there were judges over fifties there are judges over hundreds above them there were judges or chiefs over thousands and when all else failed to resolve the problem
it would get to Moses, kind of an appeals court process if you will.
Now I don't know what level of jurisdiction Caleb was overseeing.
Although based on the significance of the responsibility he was entrusted with as a representative spy for the very powerful tribe of Judah, I would guess that he ranked a fair bit higher than District Court.
What stands out to me in terms of
ultimate dude qualifications are the traits that apparently qualified him to serve as a judge.
First we find that he is a proven leader.
So look for able men among all the people.
And then we find out that he was also one who feared God.
He was faithful, he was devout, and he was a man of integrity.
So look for people who are trustworthy, people who hate a bribe, they can't be bought.
So Caleb is a guy with legal clout,
In a big title, he's a chief.
He's a proven leader.
He has demonstrated wisdom.
He's a man of genuine faith.
His character is sterling silver, but that's not all.
A couple of weeks ago, we talked about Joshua.
And Joshua, your call was another of those 10 spies who were sent in to check out the land.
Ultimately, Joshua would succeed Moses and end up being Caleb's boss.
But on that spying mission, they were just two dudes with a job to do.
And of course, the fact that they were seeing as good candidates for a spy mission behind enemy lines means that they weren't just average dudes.
They were kind of the ancient version, I think, of Navy SEALs.
And so, after this ultimate dude's list of qualifications, he had courage.
He's a guy who's an accomplished leader.
He has great wisdom.
He has a deep faith.
He has sterling character.
and he has steely-eyed courage.
But what really set Joshua and Caleb apart from the rest of SEAL Team Six wasn't the message, wasn't the mission, the mission itself.
It was the intelligent assessment they gave when they got back.
You recall that eight of the special operators came home with their tails between their legs.
They said, yeah, the land looks good, but the enemies are too strong.
their cities, their fortifications are just too good.
Their weapons are too powerful.
And if we obey God's order to attack, this is going to be nothing but a suicide mission.
But it was Joshua and Caleb who had a completely different take.
They saw all the same dangers as the other eight, but they also had complete confidence in their secret weapon.
That was God's promise.
And if they're
Great commander was telling him it was time to jump.
Their only question was, how high and how long would you like us to stay aloft, sir?
You know how that all turned out?
Because the people in mass bought into the panic report, God said that none of them would ever be allowed to enter into the promised land.
Only their children.
A fresh generation would be given that privilege and so began that famous 40-year trek of attrition.
Israel was forced into this nomadic holding pattern waiting for that generation to pass.
But there were two exceptions, right?
Joshua and Caleb.
We find in Numbers, chapter 32.
The Lord's anger was kindled that day.
He swore saying, surely, none of the men who came up out of Egypt from 20 years old and upward shall see the land that I swore to give to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob, because they have not holy followed me.
None except Caleb, the son of Jafuna, the Kennesite, and Joshua, the son of none, for they have holy followed the Lord.
Now I want you to keep your eye on that little phrase right there and see if it shows up anywhere else.
Deuteronomy 1.
The Lord heard your words and was angered and he swore not one of these men at his evil generation, so see the good land I swore to give to your fathers except Caleb the son of Jafuna.
He shall see it and to him and to his children I will give the land on which he has trodden.
Why?
Because he has wholly followed the Lord.
Caleb himself, I was 40 years old when Moses, the servant of the Lord sent me from Kedish, Barnia, to spy out the land.
And I brought him word again as it was in my heart, but my brothers who went up with me made the heart of the people melt.
Yet I, holy, followed the Lord.
Moses swore on that day saying surely the land at which your foot is trodden should be an inheritance for you and your children forever because you have holy followed the Lord my God.
Still Caleb talking.
Then Joshua blessed him and he gave Hebron to Caleb the son of Jifuna for an inheritance.
Therefore Hebron became the inheritance of Caleb the son of Jifuna the Kennesite to this day because he wholly followed the Lord, the God of Israel.
That appears to have been the defining trait of Caleb.
It wasn't just his courage, it wasn't his smarts, it wasn't his political savvy.
What set Caleb apart was that he was a man who wholly followed the Lord.
But that's not all.
The day comes after those 40 years are completed that unbelieving generation have all been given their last rights, all except Joshua and Caleb.
And it lasts as time to cross the Jordan and commence the conquest.
Of course, Joshua and Caleb are not spry young warriors.
That was 40 years ago that they were those guys.
Joshua now is commander in chief.
So obviously he'll be doing his fighting from a command post rather than a foxhole.
But then there's Caleb, our ultimate dude.
Just check out his RFO, his request for orders.
Joshua 14.
Today I'm 85 years old.
I'm as strong now as I was when Moses sent me on that journey.
And I can still travel and fight as well as I could then.
So give me the hill country that the Lord promised me.
You remember that as scouts, we found the descendants of Anak living there in great walled towns.
But if the Lord is with me, I will drive them out of the land just as the Lord said.
We already knew this guy was courageous and a fighter.
The old seal team vet is still eager for the fight.
And not just any fight, it's the toughest fight.
He says, you recall when I spied this out originally,
That's where the biggest enemies were, let me at him.
85 years old and he still swears he can take a man half his age.
Probably with one hand tied behind his back just to make it fair.
So Caleb, our ultimate dude is a chief.
He's a proven leader.
He's a wise judge.
He's a man of strong faith.
He's a courageous warrior.
And he is a senior citizen who is still fighting fit.
But there was one more trait I want to add to this list.
And that is humility.
I don't know if he spotted the little phrase there.
He said, if the Lord is with me, I will drive them out.
Caleb knew his abilities.
He knew he was a chief among his people.
He knew why only he and Joshua, among all of their peers, were still around to even have this conversation.
God had rewarded him for his faithfulness.
He knew his own abilities.
I'm guessing he showed up to this meeting with Joshua in short sleeves and flexed just a little to show the fact that he could still do the job.
But he also knew his limits.
He wasn't afraid of a fight, but he knew the enemies in that hill country really were more than he could handle.
He had seen all the same things the other eight spies had seen.
And the things that had scared him, he understood the odds they were up against.
And he knew the only way he could charge those gates of hell and win would be if the Lord was with him.
I have a hunch that long ago in the very first battle that Israel faced against the marauders of Amalek.
Caleb must have been one of the warriors that Joshua chose.
He'd been in that fight.
And you recall how that battle went, right?
The deciding factor in their triumph was tied to Moses who was seated atop this hill
holding aloft the staff of God, the physical symbol of God's presence and power to deliver his people.
Caleb had seen the moments when Moses' arms retired, and the staff began to lower, and suddenly Caleb found himself losing ground.
But then he had seen, as Moses again, with the help of his friends, began to raise that staff high, how Caleb began to get the better of the enemy.
And I think that vivid visual lesson
of unseen spiritual realities had burned itself into Caleb's memory.
And as he anticipated combat with even stronger enemies, his confidence was not in his flex, but it was in the Lord.
The phrase that had defined so much of his life was defining him still.
It was a man who wholly followed the Lord.
And if the Lord was leading him to go up those hills,
Caleb was eager to follow.
The story Caleb has always grabbed my attention because he was unique.
You don't just run into ultimate dudes every day.
I have known some very smart people.
I've known some talented people, some courageous people, some noble people, some physically strong people.
I was telling someone the other night, a friend of mine who was in the seminary had been a trainer for the Seahawks.
And we got talking to him one day, and we just said, so just how big and how strong are those guys?
They say, well, I'll tell you a story.
He said that the Hawks were playing the game.
They got to halftime, and they weren't doing well.
And some calls had gone against him, and one of the linemen came in, and he was really hot.
He was torqued.
And he comes storming into the locker room, and there's a full coke machine standing there in the locker room.
And this guy grabs the machine, picks it up, and throws it on the floor on its face.
Yep, that's pretty big, all right.
But those are people that I meet every day.
And if I do, they are notable.
Brent Hansen said of his encounter with that other ultimate dude, he said, meeting one of them can make you feel inferior.
But I don't think the point of Caleb's story is to make us feel inferior.
It's to inspire us.
There are things about Caleb
that I think were uniquely his, which may or may not even be in the realm of possibility for me or for you.
Those are the things where I can feel inferior.
You can learn wisdom, but let's face it, some people are just gifted with being able to see the big picture and to think strategically in ways that I am awed by.
You may be courageous.
But that really has nothing to do with being bigger strong.
I've known big strong guys who fainted at the side of blood.
And I've known little petite nurses that can walk into scenes of incredible trauma and just calmly do what needs to be done.
I've known people have risen through the ranks and gotten job promotions and titles as much because of who they knew as what they could do.
I can't match that.
And when it comes to good health, I have seen health food fanatics that drop dead at young ages with heart attacks.
And I've known lifelong smokers who were still stinking up the room in their 90s.
So genetics has a lot to do with who is still flexing at 85.
The thing I want to focus on from the story like Caleb's is what he can teach me beyond just natural ability.
What was true of him
that can inspire us, that can instruct us on our own long journey home.
What if a life-changing things were true of him that I believe can be true of anyone, regardless of natural abilities?
If you've been tracking with me, I think you already know what the answers are.
Two things I'd say.
One, he wholly followed the Lord, and he humbly followed the Lord.
Neither one of those things is dependent on natural abilities.
To holy and humbly follow the Lord to give him yourself with whatever you have to give and to do whatever it is he's asking you to do.
On the teaching survey that went out several weeks ago, I really appreciate all the inputs, several people expressed an interest in hearing me teach on how to finish well, how to run the course of life well.
And I love that question.
I've often said that there are many people who move to swim with the intent to stop doing things.
That's retirement communities tend to have that happen a lot.
And yet I am so grateful that in this congregation with a lot of ages, but a lot of you represent the demographic of people who may have come here and at one level could have said, I don't want to do anything anymore.
I see people who are fully engaged.
People who are asking that question, how do I finish well?
Young adults saying, how do I live well?
Parents saying, how do I parent well?
Older adults saying, how do I finish this race well?
Caleb was this senior saint who kept saying, it ain't over till it's over.
What do you want me to do, Lord?
abilities and strength may change, but that heart that is ready to holy and humbly follow the Lord is key.
And whatever the ability is and whatever stage of life you're in, that is a heart that God desires in all of us.
Also for all ages and stages, the call of the gospel is to follow the Lord.
It begins
facing the reality that there are enemies that we cannot overthrow in our own strength.
It's not just enemies out there.
The gospel challenges me to look in the mirror and recognize that the enemy that so often defeats me and hurt others is right here in me.
Jesus once told a group of very self-righteous, religious professionals that they were like a person
criticizing others because they had a speck of sawdust in their eye and they didn't realize that there was a plank sticking out of their own.
They were so blind to their own faults that it made their snobby, self-righteous critiques of others laughable.
The Apostle Paul described this personal dilemma like this from Romans 7.
It says, I know that nothing good lives in me.
That is in my sinful nature.
I want to do what is right, but I can't.
I want to do what is good, but I don't.
I don't want to do what is wrong, but I do it anyway.
Paul says one of the enemies I fight with isn't out there.
It's the enemy that I deal with in here.
I think anyone who has a modicum of introspection and self-awareness would say, oh yeah, that's usually where the bigger fights are, the harder fights.
But no, Paul didn't give up hope.
Like Caleb, he understood his own inability to overcome such an enemy, but he also knew that with God's help, victory was possible.
He went on to say this, who will free me from this life is dominated by sin and death?
Thank God, the answer is in Jesus Christ, our Lord.
See, the gospel calls us into the fight by calling us to cry out to God
for the help that only He can give, to put our faith in what Jesus has done for us at the cross.
And maybe you're someone who's come this morning and this whole thing of faith and a relationship with Jesus is nothing you've ever embraced for yourself.
And maybe you're thinking that what it takes for God to accept you and to love you is that you've got to earn it.
You've got to prove yourself to Him.
And I just want to let you know that
That's not how we win his approval.
The people you're sitting with, quite honestly, are just a bunch of failures.
Me among them, we have not been rescued by God because we were doing so well.
Jesus came because we weren't doing well at all in ourselves.
The message of grace is that he has come for us.
But just because we have stepped into a walk of faith, that doesn't mean that the battle just ends.
We're going to talk next week about the Promised Land.
We're going to talk about the fact that Israel getting into the Promised Land was not the end of the battle.
In many ways, it was just the beginning of more battles.
And yet we don't fight the battle alone.
And Paul, who knew himself, said, man, I feel this battle in myself.
How am I ever going to win?
He said, I'm going to win because of Jesus.
I'm going to win because he's with me and because I want to holy and humbly follow him and trust him.
But it doesn't stop there.
For Caleb to fully claim the land he was promised, he had to step up to the fight.
This isn't a passive thing we're being called to.
Jesus calls us into a walk of faith, but is a walk that does indeed call us to step into our own fight.
Here's what Jesus said to his disciples.
Jesus said to his disciples, if any of you wants to be my follower, you must give up your own way, take up your cross, and follow me.
If you try to hang on to your life, you will lose it.
But if you give up your life for my sake, you will save it.
And what do you benefit if you gain the whole world but lose your own soul?
Is anything worth more than your soul?
Do you know what kept everyone, almost everyone, in Caleb's generation from experiencing the promised land?
They got hung up trying to save their own lives through their own efforts.
What was different about Caleb?
Well, it wasn't just natural ability that we had plenty of that.
It wasn't a lucky promotion.
It wasn't just good genetics or great hair.
It was simply a day-to-day decision
to holy and humbly trust the Lord and do whatever it was God asked him to do.
So what would that look like for you this week?
Where is God asking you to follow him?
Or are you even asking?
Maybe you should do that.
What would it look like to take up your cross?
What would it look like to step into sacrifice and obedience to him?
What are you clinging to that feels like safety but may actually be a source of great loss?
Is there something or someone that deep in your heart you think to yourself, I could never let go of that?
That you just keep clutching onto so tightly because somehow you believe that that is really the source of your security and your safety.
Or maybe there's a grudge that you keep harboring.
And to think about forgiveness either scares you or makes you mad.
Because you're convinced that if you were to actually forgive to release that you might never get justice.
And so we hold on to it.
And we let it have a place in our heart, a hard place, an angry place.
Maybe there's some marker.
some status symbol, some point of pride that we find ourselves willing to compromise for or even live a double life to protect because we want to convey a certain image to other people.
We want them to see us a certain way even though it's not true.
And we're afraid to ever be honest and transparent about who we are because that ego, that pride matters more.
Maybe there is some personal agenda that you're allowing to tear apart the relationships in your life because you just have to have it your way.
And having your way has become more important than humbling yourself and loving others and maybe taking up a cross and following Jesus in that relationship.
You don't have to be an ultimate dude.
or an ultimate doodad.
All Jesus is asking us to do is what Caleb did.
It's to holy and humbly trust him and follow him.
Let's pray.
Father forgive us for the times that we excuse our own complacency
our laziness, sometimes our cowardice, on the basis that we just can't be that kind of person.
That those must be unique superhero people and we could never walk in their footsteps or do the things they did.
Father forgets for hiding behind those things, I pray that you would grant us the faith, you would grant us the courage to trust you.
to follow you, wherever, whatever that means.
Whatever stage of life we're in, Lord, let us follow that part of Caleb's example.
Let us be people who holy and humbly follow after you.
Lord, I believe your Holy Spirit is probably saying different things to different people all through this room.
I pray, Lord, you give us ears to hear.
and hearts that are willing to trust you and to obey.
Lord, what the world would see is not ultimate dudes.
Lord, could they see in us the changes it makes when people are willing to holy and humbly follow after you?
To follow Jesus.
I ask this in Jesus name, amen.